---
layout: post
title:      "From Accounting to Data Science"
date:       2019-02-28 14:57:35 +0000
permalink:  from_accounting_to_data_science
---


The year was 2013. I was fresh out of my Accounting undergraduate program at the University of Richmond and I was ready to make my entry into the corporate world. I was extremely excited. I had loved all of my accounting classes in undergraduate and felt confident that accounting was the world I wanted to live in for my entire career. This excitement was quickly extinguished once I made it into the work place and started actually auditing. After two years of auditing public companies, I realized I had made a mistake and needed to find a career more suited to my interests. 

While I was working as an auditor, one of my quarterly responsibilities was to complete balance sheet and income statement analytics. The process was relatively straightforward: for each line item on the balance sheet we would use historical data and current trends within the company to try and estimate what we thought each line item should be at the end of the quarter. These assumptions were generally simple and straightforward. Depending on the balance sheet/income statement item, I would usually take the prior quarter balance and applying some growth rate to it based on the company’s performance that quarter. This number that I calculated using assumptions was called the “expected balance.” After I had all of our expected line item balances for both the balance sheet and the income statement, I would compare those expected balances to the actual balances. As all auditors do, I then applied a materiality threshold that told me which discrepancies between expected and actual balance were big enough to warrant further investigation. I would flag any discrepancies that exceeded the threshold, then take my notes to the offices of the people responsible for overseeing those balances. I’d sit down with them and listen to them explain why the balance didn’t behave as we expected it to. Then, I would go back to my desk and document the things that they said, declaring the difference to be “reasonable” after the explanation. 

I never much liked the documentation aspect of auditing, but I fell in love with the process of creating these analytics. I found myself changing assumptions to try and get more realistic expectations. I often consulted with my boss on ways we could perform the analytics differently and modify our expectation models. Unfortunately, this was a tiny, tiny part of my role as an auditor and most of the work I enjoyed much less than these analytics. At this point in my life, I knew analytics were fun to me but I could never imagine doing them full-time for a living.
My second run in with analytics came when I was completing my MBA. I had originally pursued my MBA degree to switch to a career in marketing, but once I started taking marketing classes I quickly realized that marketers were heavily relying on data analysts for information about the customers they were targeting. In my last semester, I enrolled in two data analytics electives that focused on visualizing data in R and some rudimentary regression analyses. I absolutely loved these classes, and found organizing data and finding an interesting way to visualize it fascinating. For my capstone project, I worked with the EPA to create a presentation on the negative effects of plastic disposal, and used data to illustrate the inadequacy of the current recycling system to handle plastics. This project was the most fun I had during my MBA program. I got to work on a real life project that I was actually interested in, and then practice my public speaking skills by presenting it to my peers. This class left my wanting more data analytics in my life. My recycling visualizations were good, but there was no statistical analysis of the data and I felt that my analysis lacked depth. I knew I needed more refined programming skills in order to truly complete projects the way I wanted to. 

As I finished my MBA and started looking for employment in the field of digital marketing, my need for more programming skills was re-affirmed. Many of the positions I was most interested in required at least intermediate coding skills in languages I had never touched: Python and Javascript among others. To put the cherry on top, many of my professors in my marketing classes loved to talk about “big data” and how it would shape the future. I began reading up on data science, and a series of Google searches brought me to the Flatiron school. This is the path that led me to choose Flatiron and data science. Analytics caught my interest many times in my professional and educational careers, and I feel confident that this course will lead me to a rewarding and interesting career in the field of data science.

